
                    RINEX Extensions to Handle Clock Information
                    ********************************************

                           Jim Ray, US Naval Observatory
                        Werner Gurtner, University of Berne  
                  Michael J. Coleman, US Naval Research Laboratory

                         Initial version, 27 August 1998
                            Version 2.00, 16 June 1999
                            Version 3.00, 14 November 2006 
                            Version 3.02, 02 September 2010 
                            Version 3.04, 08 July 2017


SUMMARY OF CHANGES IN VERSION 3.00 and later

The changes introduced in version 3.00 are mostly to be consistent with RINEX 3.00 
and to recognize the use of other Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSSs) 
besides the Global Positioning System (GPS):

  a. "RINEX VERSION / TYPE" header changed to 3.00 and to add satellite system 
     designator.
  b. "PGM / RUN BY / DATE" header date format elaborated.
  c. "SYS / # / OBS TYPES" header added.
  d. Added Galileo and Satellite-Based Augmentation System (SBAS) satellite
     designators in Section 5.
  e. "TIME SYSTEM ID" header added.
  f. The satellite antenna phase center offset information has been moved from a 
     mandatory comment to the "SYS / PCVS APPLIED" header and now includes the 
     associated phase center variation information also. It is expected that an 
     external file will be referenced.
  g. "SYS / DCBS APPLIED" header added.
  h. Capability of handling inter-system timing biases and new intra-lab biases 
     (possibly as new types of CR data record) are under consideration but not yet 
     adopted.
  i. In version 3.01 a few cases where "GPS time" was specified have been
     corrected to read "specified system time".
  j. In version 3.02 satellite codes for the QZSS ("Jnn") and BeiDou ("Cnn")
     systems as well as the QZSS system time designator ("QZS") have been added.
  k. In version 3.04 the field width of the clock name is expanded to allow for the
     IGS "A9" names versus "A4". The file width expands to 85 characters and minor 
     modifications are made to the header.
  l. In version 3.04 satellite codes from IRNSS ("Inn") have been added.
  m. In version 3.04 and later, time system ID must be declared (GPS, GLO, GAL,
     QZS, etc.). Definitions of these with respect to TAI/UTC have been corrected.  
  n. Ability to record leap seconds as TAI-UTC or GPST-UTC is established in 3.04.


INTRODUCTION

Thus far, the IGS has produced clock results only for the GPS satellites and these 
are tabulated and distributed at the 15-minute intervals used in the sp3 orbit 
ephemerides files.  There is much interest in increasing the satellite clock 
interval to 30 seconds (e.g., to overcome SA effects on interpolation) and also in 
producing station clock results (at some appropriate interval, probably 5 minutes).
In principle, the sp3 format could continue to be used for both of these extensions, 
but it would be wasteful considering that the vast majority of the file space is set
aside for orbit information.  Also, the variety of other clock information that also 
needs to be exchanged does not lend itself to the sp3 format.

Alternatively, the IGS could devise a new format specifically for distributing clock 
information.  It does not appear that the timing community already uses a standard 
data format that is well suited for the IGS needs.


1. CLOCK DATA TYPES

At the level of monitoring and reporting data from a specific GPS station (or more 
generally, a "receiver", which could include low Earth-orbiting satellites and other 
non-stationary platforms) the following types of observations can be expected:

     calibration data (CR):  time delay measurements between a GPS receiver and
                             some external reference point (e.g., local master clock)

   discontinuity data (DR):  a phase-tracking GPS receiver (e.g., AOA TurboRouge)
                             maintains an internal clock that sometimes will reset 
                             itself; in principle, there may be methods to monitor 
                             such changes which could then be logged as a relative
                             change in clock state

From analysis of GPS data, the results for an ensemble of receiver and satellite 
clocks can be determined differentially.  Normally, all clock values are estimated 
relative to a single clock being held fixed as a reference.  Alternatively, a linear 
combination of the estimated clocks can be held fixed to some apriori value (zero,
normally).  Either way, all the clock values can be re-aligned after estimation to 
remove the effect of the particular choice of reference clock, which can change for
each data analysis arc.  Such re-alignment is most commonly done using broadcast GPS 
time for the satellites as an underlying timescale, typically fitted to a low-order 
polynomial.  In any case, the data are:

     analysis data (AR,AS):  results from GPS phase/pseudorange data analysis for 
                             a network of station/receiver (AR) and satellite (AS) 
                             clocks, all relative to a fixed reference clock (or 
                             ensemble) adopted in the analysis

If a timescale re-alignment has been applied (e.g., to GPS time), then the analysis 
reference clock will have non-zero values (but should still be reported as the 
reference in the header records) and these must be reported together with all other 
estimated clocks in the clock data records.  In this case, the method of
re-alignment should be described in the header comment records.

In addition, the broadcast clocks of the satellites can be monitored and compared
to a laboratory standard:

         monitor data (MS):  broadcast values for satellite clocks as compared 
                             with a laboratory standard via monitor receivers
                             (usually timing receivers)


2. FORMAT TYPES AND FILE NAMING

Following established practice, the receiver-specific data ("CR" and "DR") could be 
reported using an extension of the RINEX format while the analysis data ("Ax" and
"MS") could be reported using an extension to a standard product format, such as 
SINEX. However, since all of these data types are related and probably need similar
format requirements, it seems more economical to consider a single file format type
suitable for all.

RINEX seems the most appropriate file type, even though it is not normally used for 
analysis products.  When it becomes feasible and necessary to include clock 
estimates with other analysis products, then suitable formats can be incorporated 
into SINEX. Until then, it is suggested that a RINEX format extension be used for 
all clock/timing results.  Normally, "CR" and "DR" data types would be collected at 
the stations, files would be prepared at the data centers, and the files would flow 
to the Global Data Centers named as:

        for calibration data (CR) & discontinuity data (DR)
        ---------------------------------------------------
        ssssdddf.yyC      ssss:    4-character station/receiver name
                                   designator
                           ddd:    day of the year of first record
                             f:    file sequence number within day
                                   0: file contains all the existing
                                      data of the current day
                            yy:    year
                             C:    file type "C" for clock information

The suffix "C" would be a new RINEX file type.  Normally, data would be compiled
into files by each 24-hour day (according to the specified time system).

The analysis results "AR", "AS", and "MS" would be formed at IGS Analysis Centers
or by IGS/BIPM Pilot Project analysis groups and would normally include results for 
a number of stations/receivers and/or satellites. These files would be named as:

        for analysis data (Ax) & monitor data (MS)
        ------------------------------------------
        cccwwwwd.clk       ccc:    3-character analysis center name
                                   designator
                          wwww:    GPS week number
                             d:    day within GPS week (0 - 7)
                           clk:    suffix to identify clock information
                                   product files

Files could be either daily (d = 0,...,6) or weekly (d = 7).

However, despite the file names, a single format for the contents would apply for 
all data types.


3. NUMERICAL PRECISION

All timing quantities (units sec, sec/sec, sec/sec^2) are reported in exponential
format with a precision of 12 decimal places (i.e., %19.12f).


4. CLOCK DISCONTINUITIES

Clock discontinuities (in bias, rate, and/or acceleration) could be reported in 
either of two ways.  If monitored in situ and logged, these could be reported as 
"DR" data types in .yyC station files.  If detected in data analysis, these can be 
reported in .clk files as two "AR" data records for the same station at the same 
epoch but with two different sets of clock values.


5. RECEIVER AND SATELLITE NAMES

Since the clock data are normally used in conjunction with data analysis results 
(even for the calibration and discontinuity data types), it is most convenient to 
use naming conventions for the receivers and satellites which correspond to the same
names used in analyses.  In order to ensure uniqueness and complete identification,
it is also necessary to supply the receiver ID number (for fixed terrestrial
receivers, the DOMES number issued by the Terrestrial Frame Section of the IERS).
Thus, receivers should be identified by:

       Station names:     IGS official 9-character site ID or long name.
       Station number:    DOMES number (or other unique identifier)

For satellite names, the following designations are used in RINEX v3.03:

       Satellite names:   3-character string:
                          "Gnn":   nn is the PRN number for GPS satellites
                          "Rnn":   nn is the slot number for GLONASS satellites
                          "Enn":   nn is the PRN number for Galileo satellites
                          "Cnn":   nn is the PRN number for BeiDou satellites
                          "Inn":   nn is the PRN number for IRNSS satellites
                          "Jnn":   nn is PRN-192 where PRN is the QZSS satellite 
                                   PRN number
                          "Snn":   nn is PRN-100 for Satellite-Based Augmentation
                                   System (SBAS) payloads

If other satellite transmitters become available with suitable GPS- or GLONASS-like
signals, such as the geostationary platforms currently being considered, then they
can also be included using future RINEX naming conventions.


6. RINEX CLOCK FORMAT DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES

The header recorders should be included in the order indicated, when required. The
records below marked with * are optional.

It is recommended that each record be read into a blank buffer string and then the
information can be decoded afterwards from the buffer. Header and data records are
limited to 85 characters. If more than bias and bias sigma are reported, a 
continuation line must be used.

A data file must begin with the header records.  Data records begin immediately 
after the "END OF HEADER" record and complete the remainder of the data file.

 
 +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                                    TABLE A15                                    |
 |                   CLOCK DATA FILE - HEADER SECTION DESCRIPTION                  |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |    HEADER LABEL    |                  DESCRIPTION                  |   FORMAT   |
 |  (Columns  66-85)  |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |RINEX VERSION / TYPE| - Format version: 3.04                        |  F4.2,17X, |
 |                    | - File type ("C" for Clock Data)              |    A1,20X, |
 |                    | - Satellite System: G: GPS                    |    A1,22X, |
 |                    |                     R: GLONASS                |            |
 |                    |                     E: Galileo                |            |
 |                    |                     C: BeiDou                 |            |
 |                    |                     I: IRNSS                  |            |
 |                    |                     J: QZSS                   |            |
 |                    |                     S: SBAS payload           |            |
 |                    |                     M: mixed                  |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |PGM / RUN BY / DATE | - Name of program creating current file       |   A19,2X,  |
 |                    | - Name of agency creating current file        |   A19,2X,  |
 |                    | - Date and time of file creation              |   A21,2X,  |
 |                    |   . Format: YYYYMMDD  HHMMSS zone             |            |
 |                    |   . zone: 3-4 character time zone code        |            |
 |                    |     UTC recommended!                          |            |
 |                    |     LCL if local time with unknown code       |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
*|COMMENT             | Comment line(s)                               |     A65    |*
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | While comments are generally optional, they   |            |
 |                    | must be included for the following info:      |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | TIMESCALE RE-ALIGNMENT                        |            |
 |                    | ----------------------                        |            |
 |                    | If estimated clock values have been uniformly |            |
 |                    | shifted in timescale, e.g., to GPS time, the  |            |
 |                    | method applied should be noted here.  In      |            |
 |                    | addition, non-zero clock values should be     |            |
 |                    | reported in the clock data records for the    |            |
 |                    | analysis reference clock, corresponding to    |            |
 |                    | the alignment correction applied to all the   |            |
 |                    | receiver and satellite clocks.  The analysis  |            |
 |                    | reference clock should still be listed as     |            |
 |                    | "ANALYSIS CLK REF" even though it will have   |            |
 |                    | non-zero values.                              |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax", if applicable |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |SYS / # / OBS TYPES | - Satellite system code (G/R/E/C/I/J/S)       |   A1,2X,   |
 |                    | - Number of different observation types       |   I3,2X,   |
 |                    |   used for the specified satellite system     |            |
 |                    | - Observation descriptors:                    |  14(A3,1X) |
 |                    |   - Type                                      |            |
 |                    |   - Band                                      |            |
 |                    |   - Attribute                                 |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | Use continuation line(s) for more than        |     8X,    |
 |                    | 13 observation descriptors.                   |  14(A3,1X) |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | In mixed GNSS files: Repeat for each          |            |
 |                    | satellite system.                             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | ** For documentation on all observation       |            |
 |                    |    descriptors (and an exhaustive list of all |            |
 |                    |    possible combinations), refer to Section   |            |
 |                    |    5.1 of the documentation for RINEX v3.03.  |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | All characters in uppercase only!             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | EXAMPLE:                                      |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    |   L1C  C/A code-derived L1 carrier phase      |            |
 |                    |          (GPS,GLO,QZS,SBS).                   |            |
 |                    |        Carrier phase on E2-L1-E1 derived from |            |
 |                    |        C channel (GAL)                        |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | UNITS : Phase       : full cycles             |            |
 |                    |         Pseudorange : meters                  |            |
 |                    |         Doppler     : Hz                      |            |
 |                    |         SNR etc     : receiver-dependent      |            |
 |                    |         Ionosphere  : full cycles             |            |
 |                    |         Channel #   : See text                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | NOTE FOR CLOCKS:                              |            |
 |                    |    Not all possible observation types are     |            |
 |                    |    relevant for clock analysis results. List  |            |
 |                    |    only those used for clocks. The code       |            |
 |                    |    observables that are converted to a        |            |
 |                    |    different form for consistency should be   |            |
 |                    |    listed as equivalent to the converted      |            |
 |                    |    type, not the original type.               |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax" & "MS"         |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |TIME SYSTEM ID      | Time system used for time tags.               |   3X,A3    |
 |                    |  - GPS = GPS system time                      |            |
 |                    |      aligned to TAI - 19 sec                  |            |
 |                    |  - GAL = Galileo system time                  |            |
 |                    |      aligned to TAI - 19 sec                  |            |
 |                    |  - QZS = QZSS system time                     |            |
 |                    |      aligned to TAI - 19 sec                  |            |
 |                    |  - IRN = IRNSS system time                    |            |
 |                    |      aligned to TAI - 19 sec                  |            |
 |                    |  - BDS = BeiDou system time                   |            |
 |                    |      aligned to TAI - 33 sec                  |            |
 |                    |  - GLO = GLONASS system time                  |            |
 |                    |      aligned to UTC(SU) + 3 hours             |            |
 |                    |  - UTC = Coordinated Universal Time           |            |
 |                    |  - TAI = International Atomic Time            |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
*|LEAP SECONDS        | Number of leap seconds, n, separating UTC and |     I6     |*
 |                    | TAI in the relation UTC = TAI - n.            |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | Recommended for mixed GNSS files.             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
*|LEAP SECONDS GNSS   | Number of leap seconds, n, separating UTC and |     I6     |*
 |                    | GNSS system times according to the relations  |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    |            UTC ~ GLO                          |            |
 |                    |                ~ GPS - n                      |            |
 |                    |                ~ GAL - n                      |            |
 |                    |                ~ QZS - n                      |            |
 |                    |                ~ IRN - n                      |            |
 |                    |                ~ BDS - n + 14                 |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * Note that the symbol ~ is used here to      |            |
 |                    |   indicate that these GNSS timescales have    |            |
 |                    |   epoch timestamps aligned to UTC as defined  |            |
 |                    |   in various GNSS ICDs (Interface Control     |            |
 |                    |   Documents).                                 |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    |   The GNSS timescales are *not* equal to UTC  |            |
 |                    |   modulo 1 second. GNSS timescales are        |            |
 |                    |   generally maintained in real-time or near   |            |
 |                    |   real time while UTC is generated monthly for|            |
 |                    |   longer term stability. GNSS timescales are  |            |
 |                    |   steered to different UTC(k) realizations,   |            |
 |                    |   however, to keep the sub-second offset from |            |
 |                    |   UTC within standards set by their ICDs.     |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |SYS / DCBS APPLIED  | - Satellite system (G/R/E/C/I/J/S)            |   A1,2X    |
 |                    | - Program name used to apply differential     |   A17,2X   |
 |                    |   code bias (DCB) corrections                 |            |
 |                    | - Source of corrections (URL)                 |   A43      |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | Repeat for each satellite system.             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | No corrections applied: Blank fields or       |            |
 |                    | record not present                            |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax", if            |            |
 |                    |   applicable                                  |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |SYS / PCVS APPLIED  | - Satellite system (G/R/E/C/I/J/S)            |   A1,2X    |
 |                    | - Program name used to apply phase center     |   A17,2X   |
 |                    |   variation (PCV) and phase center offset     |            |
 |                    |   (PCO) corrections                           |            |
 |                    | - Source of corrections (URL) -- give filename|   A43      |
 |                    |   (preferably URL) containing values used in  |            |
 |                    |   the data analysis for the vector antenna    |            |
 |                    |   phase center offsets, PCOs (from the center |            |
 |                    |   of mass to the antenna phase center for each|            |
 |                    |   satellite; from the antenna reference point |            |
 |                    |   (ARP) to the antenna phase center for a     |            |
 |                    |   tracking antenna) and the associated phase  |            |
 |                    |   center variations (PCVs) as a function of   |            |
 |                    |   viewing angle.                              |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | Repeat for each satellite system.             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | No corrections applied: Blank fields or       |            |
 |                    | record not present                            |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax", if applicable |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |# / TYPES OF DATA   | - Number of different clock data types stored |     I6,    |
 |                    |   in the file                                 |            |
 |                    | - List of clock data types                    |  5(4X,A2)  |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | The following clock data types are defined    |            |
 |                    | in RINEX Version 2:                           |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | "AR": Data analysis results for receiver      |            |
 |                    |       clocks derived from a set of network    |            |
 |                    |       receivers and satellites w.r.t. a       |            |
 |                    |       reference clock fixed in the analysis   |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | "AS": Data analysis results for satellite     |            |
 |                    |       clocks derived from a set of network    |            |
 |                    |       receivers and satellites w.r.t. a       |            |
 |                    |       reference clock fixed in the analysis   |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | "CR": Calibration measurements for a single   |            |
 |                    |       GNSS receiver w.r.t an external local   |            |
 |                    |       reference clock                         |            |
 |                    |                                               |            | 
 |                    | "DR": Discontinuity measurements for a single |            |
 |                    |       GPS receiver                            |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |  
 |                    | "MS": Monitor measurements for the broadcast  |            |
 |                    |       satellite clocks w.r.t. a standard      |            |
 |                    |       timescale                               |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |STATION NAME / NUM  | - 4-character or 9-character site ID          |   A4,6X,   |
 |                    |                                               |     or     |
 |                    |                                               |   A9,1X    |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - Unique receiver identifier, preferably the  |   A20,35X  |
 |                    |   DOMES number for fixed stations             |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "CR" & "DR"         |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |STATION CLK REF     | Unique identifier for external reference clock|    A65     |
 |                    | being used as the standard for calibration    |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data type "CR"                 |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |ANALYSIS CENTER     | Name of Analysis Center                       |            |
 |                    | - 3-character IGS AC designator               |   A3,2X,   |
 |                    | - Full name of Analysis Center                |   A60      |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax" & "MS"         |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |# OF CLK REF        | - Number of analysis clock references         |  I6,1X,    |
 |                    |   (satellite or receiver clocks) listed under |            |
 |                    |   "ANALYSIS CLK REF"                          |            |
 |                    | - Start epoch (in the specified time system): |            |
 |                    |     4 digit year,                             |  I4,1X     |
 |                    |     month, day, hour, min,                    |  4(2I,1X)  |
 |                    |     second                                    |  F10.6,2X  |
 |                    | - Stop epoch (in the specified time system):  |            |
 |                    |     4 digit year,                             |  I4,1X     |
 |                    |     month, day, hour, min,                    |  4(2I,1X)  |
 |                    |     second                                    |  F10.6,2X  |
 |                    |   [ DEFAULT: blank start and stop times imply |            |
 |                    |              single "ANALYSIS CLK REF"        |            |
 |                    |              applies for entire file ]        |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | NOTE: Multiple groups of "# OF CLK REF" or    |            |
 |                    | "ANALYSIS CLK REF" records can be used for    |            |
 |                    | changes in analysis clock reference within    |            |
 |                    | a single analysis file.                       |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |ANALYSIS CLK REF    | List of the analysis clock references (repeat |            |
 |                    | for each reference clock enumerated in the    |            |
 |                    | previous record)                              |   A4,6X,   |
 |                    | - Name of the receiver or satellite used as   |     or     |
 |                    |   the fixed reference in data analysis        |   A9,1X,   |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - Unique identifier for reference clock (if a |  A20,15X,  |
 |                    |   receiver), preferably the DOMES number for  |            |
 |                    |   fixed stations                              |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - Optionally a non-zero value for the apriori | E19.12,1X  |
 |                    |   clock constraint can be provided (units:    |            |
 |                    |   seconds).                                   |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | NOTE: If all analysis clock estimates are     |            |
 |                    | re-aligned (e.g., to broadcast GPS time) then |            |
 |                    | the fixed (reference) clock(s) will have non- |            |
 |                    | zero values corresponding to the alignment    |            |
 |                    | corrections applied to all other clocks.      |            |
 |                    | The non-zero clock values for the reference   |            |
 |                    | clock must be reported in the clock data      |            |
 |                    | records together with the other values, but   |            |
 |                    | the reference clock should still be listed    |            |
 |                    | here. The method of re-alignment should be    |            |
 |                    | described in header comment records.          |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |# OF SOLN STA / TRF | - Number of receivers included in the clock   |   I6,4X,   |
 |                    |   data records (including the analysis        |            |
 |                    |   reference clock even if it has zero values  |            |
 |                    |   and is not given in the data records) and   |            |
 |                    |   listed in the following header records      |            |
 |                    | - Terrestrial reference frame or SINEX        |    A55     |
 |                    |   solution for the station/receiver           |            |
 |                    |   coordinates which match the clock solution  |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |SOLN STA NAME / NUM | For each station/receiver included in the     |            |
 |                    | clock data records, as well as the analysis   |            |
 |                    | reference clock even if it has zero values and|            |
 |                    | is not included in the data records (number   |            |
 |                    | given in the previous header record), include |            |
 |                    | one record with the following information:    |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - 4-character or 9-character station/receiver |   A4,6X,   |
 |                    |   name designator                             |     or     |
 |                    |                                               |   A9,1X,   |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - Unique station/receiver identifier,         |    A20,    |
 |                    |   preferably the DOMES number for fixed       |            |
 |                    |   stations                                    |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | - Geocentric XYZ station coordinates          |   I11,1X,  |
 |                    |   corresponding to the analysis clock values  |   I11,1X,  |
 |                    |   reported (units: millimeters!)              |    I11     |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "Ax"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |# OF SOLN SATS      | - Number of different satellites in the clock |   I6,59X   |
 |                    |   data records and listed in following header |            |
 |                    |   following header records                    |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "AS"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |PRN LIST            | List of all satellites reported in this file. | 16(A1,I2,  |
 |                    | Each satellite name is a 3-char string. See   |   1X),1X   |
 |                    | section 3.5 of the documentation for file     |            |
 |                    | format Rinex v3.03.                           |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 |                    | * REQUIRED for data types "AS"                |            |
 |                    |                                               |            |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
 |END OF HEADER       | Last record in the header section.            |    65X     |
 +--------------------+-----------------------------------------------+------------+
  
                          Records marked with * are optional
  
  
 +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                                    TABLE A16                                    |
 |                    CLOCK DATA FILE - DATA RECORD DESCRIPTION                    |
 +-------------+------------------------------------------------------+------------+
 | OBS. RECORD | DESCRIPTION                                          |   FORMAT   |
 |  (NO LABEL) |                                                      |            |
 +-------------+------------------------------------------------------+------------+
 |TYP/EPOCH/CLK| - Clock data type (AR, AS, CR, DR, MS)               |   A2,1X,   |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             | - Receiver or satellite name                         |   A9,1X,   |
 |             |    - Receiver name is the IGS 9-character or IGS     |     or     |
 |             |      4-character designator                          |   A4,6X,   |
 |             |    - Satellite name is the 3-character string as     |     or     |
 |             |      defined in the documentation for file format    |   A3,7X,   |
 |             |      Rinex v3.03 -- Section 3.5.                     |            |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             | - Epoch in specified system time (not local time!):  |            |
 |             |     year (4 digits),                                 |  I4,1X,    |
 |             |     month,day,hour,min,                              |  4(I2,1X)  |
 |             |     second                                           |  F9.6,1X   |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             | - Number of data values to follow                    |  I2,3X,    |
 |             | - Clock data in the following sequence:              |            |
 |             |    - Clock bias (seconds)                            |  E19.12,2X |
 |             |    - Clock bias sigma [optional] (seconds)           |  E19.12    |
 +-------------+------------------------------------------------------+------------+
 |TYP/EPOCH/CLK|    - Space over to visually show continuation        |  3X,       |
 |   (CONT)    |    - Clock rate [optional] (dimensionless)           |  E19.12,2X,|
 |             |    - Clock rate sigma [optional] (dimensionless)     |  E19.12,2X,|
 |             |    - Clock acceleration [optional] (per second)      |  E19.12,2X,|
 |             |    - Clock acceleration sigma [optional]             |  E19.12    |
 |             |      (per second)                                    |            |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             |    The continuation line is necessary for more       |            |
 |             |    than 2 data values                                |            |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             |    NB: For data types "Ax", "CR", and "MS", clock    |            |
 |             |        data are in the sense of reported station/    |            |
 |             |        satellite clock *minus* reference clock value.|            |
 |             |        For data type "DR", clock data are the sense  |            |
 |             |        of clock value after discontinuity *minus*    |            |
 |             |        prior.                                        |            |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 |             |    Clock data apart from bias values are optional.   |            |
 |             |    However, if any optional values are included, then|            |
 |             |    all lower order values must be supplied even if   |            |
 |             |    optional (although zero values may be given).     |            |
 |             |                                                      |            |
 +-------------+------------------------------------------------------+------------+


+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                      TABLE A17                                    |
|                    CLOCK DATA FILE - EXAMPLE FOR ANALYSIS DATA                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|

3.04                 C                    G                      RINEX VERSION / TYPE
TORINEXC V9.9        USNO                 19960403  001000 UTC   PGM / RUN BY / DATE
EXAMPLE OF A CLOCK DATA ANALYSIS FILE                            COMMENT
IN THIS CASE ANALYSIS RESULTS FROM GPS ONLY ARE INCLUDED         COMMENT
No re-alignment of the clocks has been applied.                  COMMENT
G    4  C1W L1W C2W L2W                                          SYS / # / OBS TYPES
   GPS                                                           TIME SYSTEM ID
    10                                                           LEAP SECONDS
G CC2NONCC          p1c1bias.hist @ goby.nrl.navy.mil            SYS / DCBS APPLIED
G PAGES             igs05.atx @ igscb.jpl.nasa.gov               SYS / PCVS APPLIED 
     2    AS    AR                                               # / TYPES OF DATA
USN  USNO USING GIPSY/OASIS-II                                   ANALYSIS CENTER
     1 1994 07 14  0  0  0.000000 1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000     # OF CLK REF
USNO      40451S003                           -.123456789012E+00 ANALYSIS CLK REF
     1 1994 07 14 21  0  0.000000 1994 07 14 21 59  0.000000     # OF CLK REF
TIDB      50103M108                          -0.123456789012E+00 ANALYSIS CLK REF
     4    ITRF96                                                 # OF SOLN STA / TRF
GOLD      40405S031            1234567890 -1234567890 -1234567890SOLN STA NAME / NUM
AREQ      42202M005           -1234567890  1234567890 -1234567890SOLN STA NAME / NUM
TIDB      50103M108            1234567890 -1234567890  1234567890SOLN STA NAME / NUM
HARK      30302M007           -1234567890  1234567890 -1234567890SOLN STA NAME / NUM
USNO      40451S003            1234567890 -1234567890 -1234567890SOLN STA NAME / NUM
    27                                                           # OF SOLN SATS 
G01 G02 G03 G04 G05 G06 G07 G08 G09 G10 G13 G14 G15 G16 G17 G18  PRN LIST
G19 G21 G22 G23 G24 G25 G26 G27 G29 G30 G31                      PRN LIST
                                                                 END OF HEADER
AR AREQ00USA 1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000  6   -0.123456789012E+00  -0.123456789012E+01
   -0.123456789012E+02  -0.123456789012E+03  -0.123456789012E+04  -0.123456789012E+05
AS G16       1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000  2   -0.123456789012E+00  -0.123456789012E-01
AR GOLD      1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000  4   -0.123456789012E-01  -0.123456789012E-02
   -0.123456789012E-03  -0.123456789012E-04
AR HARK      1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000  2    0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E+00
AR TIDB      1994 07 14 20 59  0.000000  6    0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E+00
    0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E+00

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|





ANOTHER EXAMPLE

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|

3.04                 C                    G                      RINEX VERSION / TYPE
CCLOCK               IGSACC @ GA & MIT    20170312  052227 UTC   PGM / RUN BY / DATE 
GPS week: 1939   Day: 6   MJD: 57823                             COMMENT             
THE COMBINED CLOCKS ARE A WEIGHTED AVERAGE OF:                   COMMENT             
  cod emr esa gfz jpl                                            COMMENT             
THE FOLLOWING REFERENCE CLOCKS WERE USED BY ACs:                 COMMENT             
  PIE1 HERS AMC2 ZECK                                            COMMENT             
THE COMBINED CLOCKS ARE ALIGNED TO GPS TIME                      COMMENT             
USING THE SATELLITE BROADCAST EPHEMERIDES                        COMMENT
   GPS                                                           TIME SYSTEM ID   
    37                                                           LEAP SECONDS         
    18                                                           LEAP SECONDS GNSS    
     2    AR    AS                                               # / TYPES OF DATA   
IGS  IGSACC @ GA and MIT                                         ANALYSIS CENTER     
    22    IGS14 : IGS REALIZATION of THE ITRF2014                # OF SOLN STA / TRF 
AMC2      40472S004           -1248596372 -4819428201  3976505934SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
BRUX      13101M010            4027881412   306998697  4919498989SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
DGAR00GBR 30802M001            1916268889  6029977675  -801719507SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
GUAM      50501M002           -5071312680  3568363624  1488904394SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
IENG00ITA 12724S001            4476537242   600431661  4488761471SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
ISPA      41703M007           -1881702882 -5359979952 -2890599302SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
KOKB00USA 40424M004           -5543838307 -2054585986  2387810351SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
MCM400ATA 66001M003           -1311703065   310814857 -6213255134SOLN STA NAME / NUM
MGUE00ARG 41558M001            1823327831 -4850352515 -3709085473SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
MKEA00USA 40477M001           -5464105358 -2495165607  2148291582SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
NIST      49507M002           -1288398487 -4721696927  4078625359SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
OPMT00FRA 10001S006            4202777212   171368212  4778660327SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
POL200KGZ 12348M001            1239971032  4530790140  4302578858SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
PTBB      14234M001            3844059771   709661514  5023129672SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
SEYG      39801M004            3597835943  5240884068  -516780985SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
SHAO00CHN 21605M002           -2831733885  4675665791  3275369282SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
THTI00PYF 92201M009           -5246416033 -3077259388 -1913841810SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
TWTF00TWN 23603S002           -2994428516  4951309088  2674496736SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
USN700USA 40451S009            1112162099 -4842854668  3985497070SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
WAB2      14014M002            4327318228   566955958  4636425911SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
WTZR00DEU 14201M010            4075580345   931854004  4801568245SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
ZECK00RUZ 12351M001            3451174430  3060335607  4391955758SOLN STA NAME / NUM 
    31                                                           # OF SOLN SATS      
G01 G02 G03 G05 G06 G07 G08 G09 G10 G11 G12 G13 G14 G15 G16 G17  PRN LIST            
G18 G19 G20 G21 G22 G23 G24 G25 G26 G27 G28 G29 G30 G31 G32      PRN LIST            
G                   igs14_1935.atx                               SYS / PCVS APPLIED  
                                                                 END OF HEADER       
AR AMC2      2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2    0.425537443243E-03  0.101822621880E-10
AR BRUX      2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2   -0.350305626237E-07  0.386248031436E-10
AR DGAR00GBR 2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2    0.371678253222E-07  0.179791429122E-10
AR IENG00ITA 2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2    0.260316699900E-07  0.157650668765E-10
AS G01       2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2    0.175309377613E-08  0.183422207046E-10
AS G02       2017 03 11 00 00  0.000000  2    0.868606546478E-04  0.104109157753E-10

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|



+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                       TABLE A18                                   |
|            CLOCK DATA FILE - EXAMPLE FOR CALIBRATION/DISCONTINUITY DATA           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|

3.04                 C                                           RINEX VERSION / TYPE
TORINEXC V9.9        USNO                 19960403  001000 UTC   PGM / RUN BY / DATE
EXAMPLE OF A CLOCK DATA FILE                                     COMMENT
IN THIS CASE CALIBRATION/DISCONTINUITY DATA GIVEN                COMMENT
    10                                                           LEAP SECONDS GNSS
     2    CR    DR                                               # / TYPES OF DATA
USNO 40451S003                                                   STATION NAME / NUM
UTC(USNO) MASTER CLOCK VIA CONTINUOUS CABLE MONITOR              STATION CLK REF
                                                                 END OF HEADER
CR USNO      1995 07 14 20 59 50.000000  2    0.123456789012E+00  -0.123456789012E-01
CR USNO      1995 07 14 22 19 30.000000  2   -0.123456789012E+00   0.123456789012E-02
DR USNO      1995 07 14 22 23 14.500000  2   -0.123456789012E+01   0.123456789012E+00
CR USNO      1995 07 14 23 44 50.000000  2   -0.123456789012E+02   0.123456789012E+00

----|---1|0---|---2|0---|---3|0---|---4|0---|---5|0---|---6|0---|---7|0---|---8|0---|

END OF CLOCK RINEX 3.04 DOCUMENTATION
